Yeah.
It's way To meet. Sorry. All right.
Good morning. Can you hear us? Oh, we can't hear you.
Hang on.
Is your volume? Yes.
You've got enough young people.
You've got enough young people there to ask.
They they always know about the technology.
Absolutely. Absolutely. Now can you hear
me for now? Yes.
Yeah. Yes, we can hear you.
Alright, and good morning
and welcome, um, to the petition select committee.
Um, I'm Greg O'Connor, I'm the chair of the Select Committee
and we'll just, uh, introduce ourselves.
Uh, on my right I have
Oh, Kiara, I'm Greg Fleming.
I'm an mp, uh, uh, for the electorate of Monga, Kiki,
which is otherwise known as One Tree Hill in
Auckland. Nice to meet you guys.
Uh, Kiara. My name is Carl Bates.
I'm the member of Parliament for Wang Nui, which includes,
uh, south Taranaki and Stratford.
My name's Ka Carter and I'm a green party, li p
and I actually grew up on the North Shore,
so I'm a Carmel College girl.
And I, um, my grandfather was actually the mayor
of the North Shore for 23 years,
so if you see Fred Thomas Drive, that's my grandfather.
Yes. So I'm very excited to be talking to you today
of my old stomping ground.
Alright, now look
and look, congratulations on your petition.
Um, we get a lot of things come through here, a lot
of different topics, but, um, this one is, uh, every
so often one comes through all
that's particularly interesting.
Um, and so we've enjoyed, uh, as a committee, um, reading
and some of the submissions we've had around that.
So what we'll do now, we'll hear from you.
Um, and then what we'll do
after that, we will, uh, we've got basically 10 minutes.
We'll ask some questions, um,
and then we will report back to Parliament, um, on
what, uh, you've told us.
So who's gonna lead off?
Who would like to go first? So,
Maddie's Maddie's, I'm sorry.
I'm Erin. Tip lady, the teacher.
Do you guys wanna do a quick, just say your
names you maybe if you
Okay. You go.
Um, I'm Maddie Davison. Um,
I'm Matilda Holmes.
Um, I'm Holly Littlewood.
Okay. I, how's gonna kick us off?
Uh, with some information We, the loud voice.
Um, RMS Niagara has been at the bottom
of the hold iki golf for 84 years since it hit Gem
Mine in World War ii.
And it's been leaking, um, it's been leaking oil ever since.
They could be up to 4,000, 300 tons of heavy fuel oil.
And that is slowly leaking, um, around the Raki Gulf
and it can quite easily like,
break and all the oil can spill out.
And then all our North shore beaches like Tauna Beach,
we won't, we'll never be able to swim in the beach again.
And yeah, all the marine life
or there could like some of the marine life could go extinct
because there's a lot, there's um, so many like
native, um, marine life to New Zealand
and that could all, they could all go to stage.
Yeah. And like, like little kids now, like the, like little,
little kids could grow up, like not being able
to learn about all the stuff that makes like Auckland
and like New Zealand like known.
Yeah. And um, the cleanup would, um,
take a lot of money and time out of, um, everyone's day.
Yeah. And, um, take many years to clean up.
There has been a lot of reports of oil on the surface.
Like a lot of people that live around the area, um,
have reported that they can smell oil
and that's just some of the first signs
that it is leaking.
Alright, well look, that's very good. Thank you.
And um, certainly, um, with what's just have,
you'll have no doubt read about the New Zealand Navy ship.
The same things just happened to, um, up in Samoa.
So, um, we it's quite topical that you brought this
to us now 'cause I having to deal with that.
So members have got any questions.
Have you guys, so first of all, thank you so much for,
for doing this and it is this kind of, um, this kind
of thing that our committee,
the petition select committee exists for as, uh, as, um,
the chairman was saying, uh, what will happen from this?
So we've had some communication with the Department
of Conservation, uh,
and also with the museum, uh, up in, in, uh,
and, uh, we, we can then recommend to Parliament, um,
that it instruct, uh, the various departments to actually,
um, do the cleanup.
So thank you so much for
bringing this to everyone's attention.
Have you guys read the, the, um,
the comments from the other submitters,
like the Department of Conservation?
Did you guys read those links?
Uh, some of them, yeah. Yeah.
Did you have any thoughts on what they said?
Um,
I, I know it's, it's a bit of a difficult one
and you could probably argue that that's our job Now.
You've, you've done your job of making sure that it's,
um, come to our attention.
Um, and the Maritime New Zealand, the people that look
after basically these wrecks, so they will be, um, they,
this has come up at different times.
Um, so whether that I, one thing I found interesting,
I did read that when it did sink there was quite
a spillage at the time.
Mm-Hmm. Um, so obviously probably the easy fuel, um,
but clearly the heavy fuel which is sitting at the bottom,
which is actually solid when it's cold,
but starts to spill when it gets warm.
So, um, we've actually learned a lot from this.
So thank you for bringing this to our attention.
Wonder oh, sorry, question cut.
I just wanted to ask you,
because obviously living on the North Shore, there's just
so many beaches and bays
and all the little critters
that are in the water and things like that.
So are you, um, is there a favorite beach
or bay in the Hoki Gulf that, um, that you have
that made you really passionate about making sure
that you brought this to your mps?
Yeah, Tauna is one of our local beaches
and we go there a lot and we all kind of grew up.
Like I have a lot of memories of going there
with like my family and stuff.
Yeah. There's like,
but it's not just like Tauna Beach.
It's like all the beaches in our area that
would be full of oil.
Could be full of oil.
Thank you so much.
Alright. Look, well thank you very much.
You must been in your last week of school, are you?
Yeah. Yeah. Oh, enjoy.
And, and enjoy the IC golf over the holidays oil free. Yeah.
Okay. Thanks a lot. Hey guys, thank you.
Thanks again for your, uh, very good work on this.
Thank you. Bye-Bye Bye. And thanks. Thanks, uh, Erin.
That's all right. Yep. So what's the next step
or what do we hear next?
Alright, so what, what we'll do now when we'll um, ask,
we've got those reports that we alluded to Mm-Hmm.
Um, and we discuss now whether we want to hear more evidence
or whether we'll do a report back to Parliament
with a recommendation.
And ultimately, um, the recommendation will be, um,
well without anticipating that yeah.
This is something that needs continued attention
and new attention because, um, it's not going to go away.
Mm-Hmm. And it's just this,
and again, it just continues 'cause it's so easy.
There's so much happening to be, um, these things
to be forgotten until there are a major,
there's a major storm and all of a sudden Mm-Hmm.
It breaks open. Yeah. And that's what these things, so
This could be a training exercise for the one and some or
Well, could well be well said.
Or other ways around this.
This could be the,
some I might be a good training exercise for this one here.
See you. Um, either way we'll make sure that, um,
when we do our report back, um, that that becomes public
and we'll make sure there's a copy of that made available.
Good boy. Thank you. Alright. Thanks a lot.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Bye. Thank you. Have a
good Christmas New Year. You too.
Thank you. Bye-Bye bye.
Right. Yeah.
Well that was interesting that there was a spillage,
there was a big spillage, for instance.
I didn't see, did it? Was it.